The History of Diabetes Mellitus
Robert B. Tattersall
 University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Textbook of Diabetes, 4th edition. Edited by R. Holt, C. Cockram,
A. Flyvbjerg and B. Goldstein. © 2010 Blackwell Publishing.
Keypoints
• Polyuric diseases have been described for over 3500 years. The name
 “ diabetes ” comes from the Greek word for a syphon; the sweet taste
of diabetic urine was recognized at the beginning of the fi rst
millennium, but the adjective “ mellitus ” (honeyed) was only added by
Rollo in the late 18th century.
• The sugar in diabetic urine was identifi ed as glucose by Chevreul in
1815. In the 1840s, Bernard showed that glucose was normally present
in blood, and showed that it was stored in the liver (as glycogen) for
secretion into the bloodstream during fasting.
• In 1889, Minkowski and von Mering reported that pancreatectomy
caused severe diabetes in the dog. In 1893, Laguesse suggested that
the pancreatic “ islets ” described by Langerhans in 1869 produced an
internal secretion that regulated glucose metabolism.
• Insulin was discovered in 1921 by Banting, Best, Macleod and Collip in
acid - ethanol extracts of pancreas. It was fi rst used for treatment in
January 1922.
• Diabetes was subdivided on clinical grounds into diab è te maigre (lean
subjects) and diab è te gras (obese) by Lancereaux in 1880, and during
the 1930s by Falta and Himsworth into insulin - sensitive and insulin -
 insensitive types. These classifi cations were the forerunners of the
etiological classifi cation into type 1 (insulin - dependent) and type 2
(non - insulin - dependent) diabetes.
• Insulin resistance and β - cell failure, the fundamental defects of type 2
diabetes, have been investigated by many researchers. The “ insulin
clamp ” method devised by Andres and DeFronzo was the fi rst accurate
technique for measuring insulin action. Maturity - onset diabetes of the
young was described as a distinct variant of type 2 diabetes by
Tattersall in 1974.
• Lymphocytic infi ltration of the islets (insulitis) was described as early as
1901 and highlighted in 1965 by Gepts who suggested that it might
be a marker of autoimmunity. Islet cell antibodies were discovered by
Doniach and Bottazzo in 1979
• The primary sequence of insulin was reported in 1955 by Sanger and
the three - dimensional structure by Hodgkin in 1969. Proinsulin was
discovered by Steiner in 1967, and the sequence of the human insulin
gene by Bell in 1980. Yalow and Berson invented the
radioimmunoassay for insulin in 1956. The presence of insulin receptors
was deduced in 1971 by Freychet, and the receptor protein was
isolated in 1972 by Cuatrecasas.
• The various types of diabetic retinopathy were described in the second
half of the 19th century as were the symptoms of neuropathy.
Albuminuria was noted as a common abnormality in patients with
diabetes in the 19th century and a unique type of kidney disease was
described in 1936 by Kimmelstiel and Wilson. The concept of a specifi c
diabetic angiopathy was developed by Lundbaek in the early 1950s.
• Milestones in insulin pharmacology have included the invention of
delayed - action preparations in the 1930s and 1940s; synthetic human
insulin in 1979; and in the 1990s novel insulin analogs by recombinant
DNA technology.
• The fi rst sulfonylurea carbutamide was introduced in 1955, followed by
tolbutamide in 1957 and chlorpropamide in 1960. The biguanide
phenformin became available in 1959 and metformin in 1960.
• That improved glucose control in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes was
benefi cial was proved by the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(1993) and the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (1998).
• Landmarks in the treatment of complications include photocoagulation
for retinopathy fi rst described by Meyer - Schwickerath; the importance
of blood pressure to slow the progression of nephropathy
(demonstrated by Mogensen and Parving); the introduction of low - dose
insulin in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis in the 1970s; and
improvements in the care of pregnant women with diabetes pioneered
by White and Pedersen. 
Ancient t imes
 Diseases with the cardinal features of diabetes mellitus were recognized in antiquity (Table 1.1 ). A polyuric state was described
 in an Egyptian papyrus dating from c. 1550 bc , discovered by
Georg Ebers (Figure 1.1 ), and a clearly recognizable description
of what would now be called type 1 diabetes was given by Aretaeus
of Cappadocia in the 2nd century ad (Figure 1.2 a). Aretaeus was
the fi rst to use the term “ diabetes, ” from the Greek word for a
syphon, “ because the fl uid does not remain in the body, but uses
the man ’ s body as a channel whereby to leave it. ” His graphic
account of the disease highlighted the incessant fl ow of urine,
Diabetes is a dreadful affliction, not very frequent among
men, being a melting down of the flesh and limbs into
urine. The patients never stop making water and the flow is
incessant, like the opening of aqueducts. Life is short,
unpleasant and painful, thirst unquenchable, drinking
excessive, and disproportionate to the large quantity of
urine, for yet more urine is passed. One cannot stop them
either from drinking or making water. If for a while they
abstain from drinking, their mouths become parched and
their bodies dry; the viscera seem scorched up, the patients
are affected by nausea, restlessness and a burning thirst, and
within a short time, they expire.
In 1815, the French chemist Michel Chevreul (1786 – 1889) proved
that the sugar in diabetic urine was glucose [4] . In the middle of
the century, tasting the urine to make the diagnosis was superseded by chemical tests for reducing agents such as glucose as
introduced by Trommer in 1841, Moore in 1844 and – the best
known – Fehling in 1848. Measurement of blood glucose could
only be done by skilled chemists but needed so much blood that
it was rarely used in either clinical care or research. It only became
practicable with the introduction in 1913 of a micromethod by
the Norwegian - born physician Ivar Christian Bang (1869 – 1918)
and it was the ability to measure glucose repeatedly which led to
development of the glucose tolerance test between 1913 and 1915.
 Glucose metabolism was clarifi ed by the work of Claude
Bernard (1813 – 1878) [5] , the Frenchman whose numerous discoveries have given him a special place in the history of physiology (Figure 1.5 ). When Bernard began work in 1843, the prevailing
theory was that sugar could only be synthesized by plants, and
that animal metabolism broke down substances originally made
in plants. It was also thought that the blood only contained sugar
after meals, or in pathologic states such as diabetes. Between 1846
and 1848, Bernard reported that glucose was present in the blood
of normal animals, even when starved. He also found higher
concentrations of glucose in the hepatic than in the portal vein,
and “ enormous quantities ” of a starch - like substance in the liver
which could be readily converted into sugar. He called this “ glycogen ” (i.e. sugar - forming) and regarded it as analogous to starch
in plants. His hypothesis – the “ glycogenic ” theory – was that
sugar absorbed from the intestine was converted in the liver into
glycogen and then constantly released into the blood during
fasting.
 Another discovery by Bernard made a great impression in an
era when the nervous control of bodily functions was a scientifi -
cally fashionable concept. He found that a lesion in the fl oor of
the fourth ventricle produced temporary hyperglycemia ( piq û re
diabetes) [6] . This fi nding spawned a long period in which
nervous infl uences were thought to be important causes of diabetes; indeed, one piece of “ evidence ” – cited by J.J.R. Macleod
as late as 1914 – was that diabetes was more common among
engine drivers than other railway workers because of the mental
strain involved [7] .
 In the fi rst part of the 19th century the cause of diabetes was a
mystery, because autopsy usually did not show any specifi c
lesions. A breakthrough came in 1889 when Oskar Minkowski
(Figure 1.6 ) and Josef von Mering (1849 – 1908) reported that
pancreatectomy in the dog caused severe diabetes [8] . This was
serendipitous, because they were investigating fat metabolism; it
is said that the laboratory technician mentioned to Minkowski
that the dog, previously house - trained, was now incontinent of
urine. Minkowski realized the signifi cance of the polyuria, and
tested the dog ’ s urine.
 Possible explanations for the role of the pancreas were that it
removed a diabetogenic toxin, or produced an internal secretion
that controlled carbohydrate metabolism. The concept of
 “ internal secretions ” had been publicized in June 1889, by the
well - known physiologist Charles - É douard Brown - S é quard
(1817 – 1894), who claimed to have rejuvenated himself by injections of testicular extract [9] . It was given further credence in
1891, when Murray reported that myxoedema could be cured by
sheep thyroid extract by injection or orally.
 In 1893, Gustave Laguesse suggested that the putative internal
secretion of the pancreas was produced by the “ islands ” of cells
scattered through the gland ’ s parenchyma [10] , which had been
discovered in 1869 by the 22 - year - old Paul Langerhans (1847 –
 1888) (Figure 1.7 ). Langerhans had described these clusters of
cells, having teased them out from the general pancreatic tissue,
but had not speculated about their possible function [11] ; it was
Laguesse who named them the “ islets of Langerhans. ” At this
time, the glucose - lowering internal secretion of the islets was still
hypothetical, but in 1909 the Belgian Jean de Meyer named it
insuline (from the Latin for “ island ” ) [12] .
 It would be wrong to give the impression that Minkowski ’ s
experiments immediately established the pancreatic origin of diabetes. In fact, during the next two decades, it was widely agreed
that diabetes was a heterogeneous disorder with various subtypes,
and that its pathogenesis involved at least three organs: the brain,
pancreas and liver [13] . The discovery by Blum in 1901 that injection of an adrenal extract caused glycosuria implicated other
glands, and led to the “ polyglandular theory ” of Carl von Noorden
(Vienna), who proposed that the thyroid, pancreas, adrenals and
parathyroids controlled carbohydrate metabolism. 
Discovery of i nsulin
 Many attempts were made between 1889 and 1921 to isolate the
elusive internal secretion of the pancreas. These largely failed
because the extracts were inactive or had unacceptable side
effects; some preparations may have had limited biologic activity,
but this was not recognized, either because hypoglycemia was
misinterpreted as a toxic reaction or because blood glucose was
not measured. Those who came closest were the Berlin physician,
Georg Zuelzer (1840 – 1949) in 1907 [23] , Ernest Scott (1877 –
 1966) in Chicago in 1911 [24] and Nicolas Paulesco (1869 – 1931)
in Romania in 1920 – 1921 [25] (Figure 1.10 ).
 The story of how insulin was discovered in Toronto in 1921 is
well known, at least superfi cially (Figure 1.11 ). A young orthopedic surgeon, Frederick Banting, inspired after reading an article
by the pathologist Moses Barron (1884 – 1975), wondered whether
the antidiabetic pancreatic principle was digested by trypsin
during extraction, and decided to prevent this loss by ligating
the pancreatic duct, thus causing the exocrine tissue to degenerate. He approached the Professor of Physiology in Toronto,
J.J.R. Macleod, an authority on carbohydrate metabolism, who
poured scorn on the idea and suggested that the only likely
outcome would be “ a negative result of great physiological
importance. ”
 Eventually, Macleod relented and installed Banting in a
rundown laboratory, later leaving for Scotland and a fi shing
holiday. A student, Charles Best, was chosen by the toss of a coin
to help Banting. Within 6 months of this unpromising start,
Banting and Best (referred to in Toronto academic circles as B 2
 )
had discovered the most important new therapy since the
antisyphilitic agent Salvarsan. These events are described in detail
in the excellent book by Michael Bliss [26] .
 Their approach began with the injection of extracts of atrophied pancreas (prepared according to Macleod ’ s suggestions)
into dogs rendered diabetic by pancreatectomy). Subsequently,
they discovered that active extracts could be obtained from beef
pancreas which Best obtained from the abbatoir. The extraction
procedure (using ice - cold acid - ethanol) was greatly refi ned by
James B. (Bert) Collip, a biochemist who was visiting Toronto on
sabbatical leave.
 The fi rst clinical trial of insulin (using an extract made by
Best) took place on January 11, 1922, on 14 - year - old Leonard
Thompson, who had been on the Allen starvation regimen since
1919 and weighed only 30 kg (Figure 1.12 ). After the fi rst injection, his blood glucose level fell slightly, but his symptoms were
unchanged and he developed a sterile abscess. On January 23, he
was given another extract prepared by Collip, and this normalized
his blood glucose by the next morning; further injections over the
next 10 days led to marked clinical improvement and complete
elimination of glycosuria and ketonuria. Initial clinical results in
seven cases were published in the March 1922 issue of the
Canadian Medical Association Journal [27] , which concluded
dramatically that:
1 Blood sugar can be markedly reduced, even to normal
values;
2 Glycosuria can be abolished;
3 The acetone bodies can be made to disappear from the
urine;
4 The respiratory quotient shows evidence of increased utilization of carbohydrates;
5 A defi nite improvement is observed in the general condition
of these patients and, in addition, the patients themselves report
a subjective sense of well - being and increased vigor for a period
following the administration of these preparations.
 The term “ insulin ” was coined by Macleod, who was unaware
of de Meyer ’ s earlier suggestion of insuline . News of its miraculous effects spread astonishingly rapidly [28] . In 1922, there were
only 19 references in the world literature to “ insulin ” or equivalent terms such as “ pancreatic extract ” ; by the end of 1923, there
were 320 new reports, and a further 317 were published during
the fi rst 6 months of 1924.
 By October 1923, insulin was available widely throughout
North America and Europe. International recognition followed
rapidly for its discoverers, and the 1923 Nobel Prize for Physiology
or Medicine was awarded jointly to Banting and Macleod. Banting
was angered by the decision, and announced publicly that he
would share his prize with Best, whereupon Macleod decided to
do the same with Collip.
The p ostinsulin e ra
 It was confi dently anticipated that insulin would do for diabetes
in the young what thyroid extract had done for myxoedema, but
it soon became obvious that insulin was a very different type of
treatment. Thyroid was given once a day by mouth and at a fi xed
dosage. Insulin had to be injected in measured amounts which
varied from day to day, and carried the ever - present danger of
hypoglycemia. One often reads that insulin “ revolutionized ” the
treatment of diabetes; it did so in the sense that it saved the lives
of many who would otherwise have died, but its unforeseen effect
was to transform an acute, rapidly fatal illness into a chronic
disease with serious long - term complications. For example, only
2% of deaths among Joslin ’ s young patients with diabetes before
1937 were caused by kidney disease, while over 50% dying
between 1944 and 1950 had advanced renal failure. Strategies to
avoid and prevent the chronic complications of diabetes remain
important scientifi c and clinical priorities today. 
 The rest of this chapter highlights some developments
that can be regarded as landmarks in the understanding
and management of the disease: to some extent, this is a
personal choice, and it is obvious from the other chapters in
this book that the “ history ” of diabetes is being rewritten all
the time.
 Causes and n atural h istory of d iabetes
 The recognition that diabetes was not a single disease was important in initiating research that has helped to unravel the causes of
hyperglycemia.
 The broad etiologic subdivision into type 1 (juvenile - onset, or
insulin - dependent) and type 2 diabetes (maturity - onset, or non - insulin - dependent) stemmed ultimately from Lancereaux ’ s
diab è te maigre and diab è te gras distinction, as well as observations
soon after the discovery of insulin that some patients did not react
 “ normally ” to insulin. In the 1930s, Wilhelm Falta (1875 – 1950)
in Vienna [29] and Harold Himsworth (1905 – 93) in London [30]
proposed that some individuals with diabetes were more sensitive
to the glucose - lowering effects of insulin, whereas others were
insulin - insensitive, or insulin - resistant. The former were usually
thin and required insulin to prevent ketoacidosis, while the latter
were older, obese and ketosis - resistant.
 The “ insulin clamp ” technique developed in the 1970s by
Ralph DeFronzo et al . [31] in the USA was the fi rst to measure
rigorously the hypoglycemic action of insulin, and has led to
countless studies of insulin resistance and its relationship to type
2 diabetes and vascular disease. Various groups, including
DeFronzo ’ s, have helped to clarify the role of β - cell failure in type
2 diabetes, and how it relates to insulin resistance. Maturity - onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) was recognized in 1974 by Robert
Tattersall ( b. 1943) as a distinct, dominantly inherited subset of
type 2 diabetes [32] ; since 1993, fi ve different molecular defects
have been identifi ed in this condition. 
The causes of the profound β - cell loss that led to the severe
insulin defi ciency of type 1 diabetes remained a mystery for a long
time. “ Insulitis ” , predominantly lymphocytic infi ltration of the
islets, was noted as early as 1901 by Eugene L. Opie (1873 – 1971)
and colleagues [33] , but because it was apparently very rare,
found in only six of 189 cases studied by Anton Weichselbaum
(1845 – 1920) in 1910, its importance was not appreciated. The
possible role of insulitis in β - cell destruction was not suggested
until 1965, by the Belgian Willy Gepts (1922 – 1991) [34] . The
theory that type 1 diabetes results from autoimmune destruction
of the β cells was fi rst made in 1979 by Deborah Doniach (1912 –
 2004) and GianFranco Bottazzo ( b. 1946) [35] . Unlike other
autoimmune endocrine diseases where the autoantibody persists,
islet cell antibodies (ICA) turned out to be transient and disappeared within a year of the onset of diabetes. An unexpected
fi nding from the Barts – Windsor prospective study of the epidemiology of diabetes in childhood started by Andrew Cudworth
(1939 – 1982) was that ICA could be detected in siblings of young
people with diabetes up to 10 years before they developed apparently acute - onset diabetes. This long lead - in period raised the
possibilty of an intervention to prevent continuing β - cell destruction. Cyclosporine in people with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes
prolongs the honeymoon period but without permanent benefi t
once the drug is stopped [36] . Nicotinamide and small doses of
insulin (together with many other interventions) prevent diabetes
in the non - obese diabetic (NOD) mouse but were without effect
in relatives of people with type 1 diabetes with high titers of ICA
 [37,38] .
 From 1967, when Paul Lacy (1924 – 2005) showed that it was
possible to “ cure ” diabetes in inbred rats with an islet cell transplant, it always seemed that the problem of islet cell transplantation in humans was about to be solved. Hope was rekindled in
2000 by a team in Edmonton, Canada. After 5 years 80% of their
transplanted patients were producing some endogenous insulin
but only 10% could manage without any injected insulin [39] .
 Chronic d iabetic c omplications
 It had been assumed that arteriosclerosis caused chronic diabetic
complications, but this notion was challenged by two papers published in the mid - 1930s, which pointed to specifi c associations of
diabetes with retinal and renal disease (Table 1.2 ). In 1934, Henry
Wagener (1890 – 1961) and Russell Wilder (1885 – 1959) from the
Mayo Clinic reported patients who had retinal hemorrhages but
no other clinical evidence of vascular disease [40] , and concluded
that “ The very existence of retinitis in cases in which patients have
no other signs of vascular disease must mean that diabetes alone
does something to injure the fi ner arterioles or venules of the
retina, probably the latter. ”
 In 1936, Paul Kimmelstiel (1900 – 1970) and Clifford Wilson
(1906 – 1997) described the striking histologic fi nding of “ intercapillary glomerulosclerosis ” – large hyaline nodules in the
glomeruli – in the kidneys of eight subjects at autopsy (Figure
 1.13 ) [41] . Seven of the eight patients had a known history of
diabetes, and Kimmelstiel and Wilson noted the common features of hypertension, heavy albuminuria with “ oedema of the
nephrotic type, ” and renal failure. In fact, this paper led to considerable confusion during the next 15 years: according to one
writer, the “ Kimmelstiel – Wilson syndrome ” came to mean all
things to all men [42] . Nonetheless, it was signifi cant because it
drew attention to a specifi c diabetic renal disease.
 Acceptance of the concept that diabetic angiopathy was specifi c
to the disease owed much to the work of Knud Lundb æ k of
Aarhus in Denmark (Figure 1.14 ), who published his fi ndings in
a book in 1953 – 1954 and a paper in the Lancet in 1954 [43,44] .
His key arguments were that long - standing diabetic vascular
disease differed fundamentally from atherosclerosis, in that both
sexes were equally affected and that microaneurysms, ocular
phlebopathy and Kimmelstiel – Wilson nodules were unique to
diabetes and usually occurred together. 
Management of d iabetes
 An objective observer surveying clinical diabetes during the half -
 century after the discovery of insulin and the “ resurrection ” (a
word used by Joslin) of young people with diabetes would have
been dismayed by what he saw (Table 1.4 ). In particular, young
people were dying of complications that had previously been
assumed to be the preserve of the elderly. Two particularly
depressing papers were published in 1947 and 1950. First, Henry
Dolger (1909 – 1997) in New York described 20 patients who fulfi lled the then - accepted criteria for excellent diabetic control, but
who all developed severe retinopathy after 6 – 22 years [63] ;
among these was the fi rst patient ever to receive insulin at Mount
Sinai Hospital, New York, who also had heavy albuminuria and
hypertension by the age of 32. Second, Ruth Reuting reported a
cohort of 50 young patients originally identifi ed in 1929 [64] . By
1949, one - third had died (mostly from cardiovascular and renal
disease) at an average age of 25 years, after only 18 years of diabetes, and the survivors showed “ ominous signs of hypertension,
azotemia and proteinuria in signifi cant numbers. ” This had
occurred despite the introduction of more versatile insulin preparations (see below); the situation was so hopeless that it inaugurated 20 years of treatment with “ heroic ” measures such as
adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy
These and other studies raised questions about whether lowering blood glucose levels to normal could prevent diabetic complications or reverse them once they had appeared. The hypothesis
remained untestable for four more decades, until the means to
achieve tight glycemic control and measure it had been devised.
Insulin
 For the fi rst decade after its discovery, insulin was available only
in its soluble (regular) formulation, whose short - action profi le
required multiple daily injections. The fi rst delayed - action preparation, protamine insulinate, was introduced in 1936 by Hans
Christian Hagedorn in Denmark (Figure 1.17 ) [65] . This was
followed by protamine zinc insulin later the same year, then globin insulin in 1939, NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn, or
isophane) in 1946, and the lente series in 1952. Long - acting insulins were welcomed by diabetes specialists and patients, but their
use as a single daily injection probably produced worse glycemic
control than three or four injections of soluble insulin. Indeed,
delayed - action preparations were initially condemned by some
diabetes specialists, such as Russell Wilder of the Mayo Clinic,
because the patient could slip without apparent warning into
hypoglycemia.
 The number and variety of insulin preparations proliferated,
but the main advances were in methods to produce highly purifi ed preparations from porcine or bovine pancreas, which
remained the source for therapeutic insulin until the early 1980s.
Insulin was the fi rst therapeutic protein to be produced by
recombinant DNA technology, initially by David Goeddel ( b.
1951), who expressed synthetic genes encoding the A - and
B - chains separately in Escherichia coli and then combined these
chemically to produce human - sequence insulin [66] . From there,
genetic engineering has been used to produce “ designer ” insulins
such as the fast - acting insulin analogs lispro and aspart and the
 “ peakless ” basal insulins such as glargine and detemir. How much
these will improve glycemic control in the generality of people
with diabetes is debatable; weekend golfers do not become champions when given expensive clubs!
 Most people with diabetes still inject insulin subcutaneously.
From the patient ’ s viewpoint, major milestones were the replacement of glass and steel syringes by disposable plastic syringes with
fi ne - gauge needles, and then by “ pen ” injection devices invented
by John Ireland (1933 – 1988) in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1981 [67] .
Portable insulin infusion pumps were developed by John Pickup
( b. 1947) and colleagues in London during the late 1970s [68] ,
and have become progressively smaller and more sophisticated.
Patients and manufacturers hope that there will eventually be an
insulin that can be given without injection. The fi rst inhaled
insulin was marketed in 2006 but withdrawn a year later because
of lack of demand and concerns about safety [69] .
Oral h ypoglycemic a gents
 The fi rst orally active glucose - lowering drug, synthalin, a guanidine derivative, was developed by Frank and colleagues in Breslau
in 1926 [70] , but had to be withdrawn because of toxicity (a recurrent problem for oral hypoglycemic drugs). The sulfonylureas
originated from the work of Auguste Loubati è res (1912 – 1977) in
France during the early 1940s on the glucose - lowering action of a
sulfonamide derivative, 2254RP. Loubati è res made the crucial
observations that proved that these drugs act as insulin secretagogues and that they were effective in intact, but not in pancreatectomized, animals [71] . In 1955 carbutamide was the fi rst
sulfonylurea to enter clinical practice and tolbutamide followed
in 1957. Phenformin, the fi rst biguanide, was introduced in 1959
following research into the metabolic effects of guanidine derivatives which had built on Frank ’ s initial studies [72] . Metformin
appeared on the European market in 1960 but was not marketed
in the USA until 1994. Troglitazone, the fi rst of a new class of
antidiabetic drugs, the glitazones, was also marketed in 1994 but
withdrawn because of liver damage. It was followed by rosiglitazone and pioglitazone. Another new class of drugs, acting on the
incretin system, were introduced in 2005. These are either glucagon - like peptide 1 (GLP - 1) agonists (such as exenatide) or inhibitors of the enzyme dipeptidylpeptidase - 4 (DPP - 4) which breaks
down GLP - 1 (gliptins).
 Tolbutamide, phenformin and insulin were compared in the
treatment of maturity - onset diabetes in the fi rst randomized controlled trial, the University Group Diabetes Program [73 – 75] .
This much - criticized study concluded that the death rate was
higher for both oral agents than for placebo, and that insulin
(whether given in a fi xed or variable dose) was no better than
placebo [75] . These fi ndings were interpreted by some as suggesting that treatment of maturity - onset diabetes was a waste of time
 – a myth that was only laid fi nally to rest by the UK Prospective
Diabetes Study.
Glucose c ontrol and t reatment t argets
 During the 1920s, opinion leaders advocated normalizing blood
glucose in young patients with diabetes, the rationale being to
 “ rest ” the pancreas, in the hope that it might regenerate. The only
way of monitoring diabetic control was by testing the urine for
glucose, and attempts to keep the urine free from sugar inevitably
resulted in severe hypoglycemia and often psychologic damage.
This led to the so - called “ free diet ” movement – linked particularly with Adolf Lichtenstein (Stockholm) and Edward Tolstoi
(New York) – which encouraged patients to eat whatever they
liked and not to worry about glycosuria, however heavy. Tolstoi ’ s
view [76] was that a life saved by insulin should be worth living,
and that patients should be able to forget that they had diabetes
after each morning ’ s injection; it seems likely that many physicians followed this policy for the next 40 years. 


Major b urdens
 The burden of any disease, including diabetes, can be described
by its health - related impacts: the morbidity and mortality caused,
and the social and economic costs to individuals, families, communities and national economies (Box 5.1 ). Evaluation of
resources utilized or lost, be they human, social, monetary or
infrastructural, and placing objective “ values ” on them may be
inherently partial to the perspective taken. The term “ value ” may
be used to describe the measured and/or perceived net worth of
resources consumed or lost because of illness and/or infi rmity
which is the mode used in this chapter. Economists use this term
to express the net benefi t derived from an investment in health
care in proportion to the amount of resources used [43] .
Acute and c hronic d isease c omplications
 The patterns of major health - related burdens of diabetes vary by
the type of disease. T2DM accounts for 90 – 95% of all cases
worldwide. Both T1DM and T2DM, the two most common
forms, may be associated with acute and chronic metabolic consequences, but the frequency of events varies according to the
underlying pathophysiology and level of glycemic control.
 Acute fl uctuations in serum glucose may rapidly spiral into
emergency situations, with potentially fatal repercussions if
untreated. Episodes of severe acute hyperglycemia (e.g. diabetic
ketoacidosis [DKA] and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome) 
or, conversely, severe hypoglycemia, most often require immediate medical management. Longer term follow - up is then intended
to promote better blood glucose regulation and avoidance
of precipitants of diabetic emergencies (e.g. infection, non -
compliance with treatments, missing meals, alcohol abuse). Apart
from atypical variants such as ketosis - prone T2DM in African
subjects [11] , the vast majority of acute complications occur in
patients with T1DM, while approximately 10 – 12% occur in subjects with T2DM. When treated properly, the mortality from
acute hyperglycemic episodes such as DKA is extremely low (e.g.
DKA mortality in Taiwan, USA and Denmark were estimated to
occur in 0.67 – 4.0% of cases) [44,45] . In contrast, in some African
countries, mortality from DKA can be as high as 25 – 33% [46] ,
although the incidence of these complications from LMIC settings is limited [47] . Individual patient (e.g. age, additional co -
 morbidities) and resource (e.g. hospital facilities, experience of
staff) characteristics may also modify the outcomes. In underresourced settings for example, complex, cumulative and interconnected barriers (poor accessibility, inadequate therapeutic
instruments and medication, and insuffi cient numbers of trained
staff) result in poor glycemic control and higher risk of mortality
 [48] . As such, early life mortality in patients with T1DM in low -
 resource settings is commonplace. The post - diagnosis life expectancy in some regions of Africa is just 1 year [49] .
 Apart from glucose dysregulation, both T1DM and T2DM are
associated with damaging effects on tissues, with eventual progression to devastating complications. Diabetes increases the risk
of macrovascular diseases (cardiovascular diseases [CVD], which
comprise coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease or
 “ stroke, ” and peripheral vascular disease [PVD]), microvascular
diseases (retinopathy and nephropathy), neuropathies, and the
consequences that stem from these (e.g. congestive heart failure,
diabetic foot). These complications are associated with considerable morbidity, reduced quality of life, disability, premature mortality and high economic costs
 In addition, T2DM is associated with the “ metabolic syndrome, ” a collection of cardiovascular risk factors (abdominal
obesity, hyperinsulinemia, hypertension, dyslipidemia, proinfl ammatory and procoagulant states). It is believed that these
biochemical and infl ammatory derangements are intimately
linked, possibly by a central mediating factor. In Latin America,
it is estimated that 53 – 69% of people with diabetes have abnormal serum lipid subfractions, and 34 – 67% have hypertension
 [17] . As such, these factors increase the likelihood of developing
additional risks, and with each added risk, predispose one to an
exponentially increasing risk of atherosclerotic vascular disease
events and mortality [50] .
 Moreover, T2DM has a distinctive association with coronary
heart disease (CHD). Those with diabetes have a two - to fourfold
higher risk of developing CHD than people without diabetes [51] .
More signifi cantly, however, the age - and sex - adjusted cardiovascular mortality risk in patients with diabetes is equivalent to that
of individuals without diabetes who have had a previous myocardial infarction (MI) [50,52,53] . Precursors common to both
T2DM and CVD (insulin resistance, visceral adiposity and excess
infl ammation) [54 – 58] , and a complex mix of mechanistic processes such as oxidative stress, enhanced atherogenecity of cholesterol particles, abnormal vascular reactivity, augmented
hemostatic activation and renal dysfunction, cumulatively confer
this elevated risk of CHD [59] . As such, simply controlling
glucose has not been found to reduce CVD events and mortality
in large randomized controlled trials at least in the short term
 [60 – 62] . The implications therefore are that individualized comprehensive multifactorial risk management, involving the treatment of all co - morbidities, has been advocated for people with
T2DM [63,64] , adding to the burdens placed on patients, providers and health systems.
 Diabetes also increases the risk of renal dysfunction. In Africa,
it is estimated that within 5 – 10 years following diagnosis, 32 – 57%
of people with diabetes will have developed microalbuminuria
 [48,65] . Also, diabetes is the primary cause in approximately 45%
of patients with end - stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring dialysis
or transplantation in the USA [66,67] . Meanwhile, approximately
one in four persons with diabetes have some visual impairment,
and 5% of all cases of blindness globally are caused by diabetes
 [68] . Particularly in the case of retinopathy and nephropathy,
duration of disease, age, glycemic control and blood pressure
control have all been found to be prominent modifying factors
of disease onset, progression and outcomes.
 Neuropathies are also common consequences of diabetes.
One - third of Sri Lankan people with diabetes surveyed had lower
extremity sensory loss putting them at risk of ulceration [69] ,
while a similar proportion of people with diabetes in African
countries were found to have either neuropathy or compromised
peripheral vascular circulation [70,71] . The combination of neuropathy, increased susceptibility to infection, poor wound healing
and poor distal circulation increases the risk of lower extremity
amputation 15 - to 40 - fold [67,72] .
 The most signifi cant repercussion of the asymptomatic early
natural history of the diabetes and low community awareness is 
that subclinical disease results in progressive tissue injury.
Microvascular and macrovascular complications cause morbidity, greater health - seeking and increased mortality risk in all
regions of the world [23,27,73] .
Health u tilization p atterns
 Health seeking and health utilization behaviors are infl uenced by
a number of individual, provider and system level factors. In the
case of diabetes, ill health and morbidity as well as preventative
care motives result in incrementally more health service utilization. In Costa Rica, for example, people with diabetes made 55%
more medical visits than those without diabetes, and German
patients with diabetes averaged 31 yearly consultations with
general practitioners (GPs) and/or specialists [74,75] . In Sweden
and Italy, approximately half of diabetes - related consultations
were at hospital outpatient departments or dedicated diabetes
centers, respectively, and the remainder were with GPs [76,77] .
In Latin America, diabetes accounts for an estimated 35 million
medical visits annually [74] .
 Various studies have shown that having diabetes doubles one ’ s
risk of hospitalization compared to not having diabetes, and this
risk is amplifi ed by the development of diabetes - related complications. The presence of poor peripheral circulation increases the
risk of hospitalization by 70%, while CVD increases this risk by
310% [67] . The Cost of Diabetes in Europe Type II Study (CODE -
 2) reported 13% of people with T2DM were hospitalized (with
an average stay of 23 days) over the 6 - month study follow - up,
while Germany ’ s Cost of Diabetes Mellitus (CoDiM) study
reported that 28.8% of people with diabetes had at least one
hospital admission in 2001 [75] . Although studies from most
regions of the world report late - stage macrovascular or microvascular complications as the leading cause of diabetes - related
hospitalizations, lower income settings such as Ethiopia confront
a greater proportion (almost two - thirds) of admissions in the
form of acute episodes of dysglycemia.
 Health care infrastructure and fi nancing have strong impacts
on health seeking and utilization. In India, estimates suggest that
85 – 95% of all health care costs are borne by individuals and their
families from household income [78 – 81] . In Latin America, 40 –
 60% of diabetes expenses are derived from out - of - pocket payments. A survey in Jamaica showed that 57% of the sample
reported fi nancial diffi culties as a result of illness, and of these,
half disclosed that they had avoided therapy because of economic
constraints [74] . Financial limitations to accessing treatment are
not confi ned to LMICs, as illustrated by 19% of elderly Americans
revealing curtailed purchases of diabetes medications as a result
of costs [82,83] .
 When one considers that the average number of medications
used by people with diabetes in India is 3.5 [79] , the cost implications are substantial. These drugs include antihypertensives,
lipid - lowering, antidepressant medications and aspirin in addition to glucose - lowering drugs). The use of oral hypoglycemics
increases health expenditure by 40% compared to the general
population, while regular insulin use is a further twofold greater
expense. As such, data from Germany show that use of insulin
with or without oral agents increases total costs 3.1 – 3.4 times
 [75,84] .
 Increased health seeking and utilization in people with diabetes
and associated complications result in greater medical costs
incurred, compared to the general non - diabetic population.
Disability
 Aside from the medical or biologic dysfunction caused by disease,
there are implications of ill health for individual and interactive
functioning in society. This concept of “ disability ” is distinctive
from simple biomedical models of disease and signifi es that psychosocial illness or physical deviations from generally accepted
norms of anatomical structure or physiologic function may
impair one ’ s ability to perform domestic and occupational activities, and assume societal roles. As a result, diabetes may inhibit
one ’ s general utility and ability to integrate fully in society.
 Diabetes can lead to disability through a variety of ways.
Excluding the medical aspects of diabetes - related complications
that directly restrict bodily function, diabetes may be considered
a “ hidden ” disability, whereby the individual concerned is hampered from routine activities, but displays no physical manifestation of this illness. For example, children with diabetes may be
unable to participate in all activities their contemporaries are
engaged in and may suffer wrongful discrimination. Adults in the
workplace may have lower work performance by virtue of any
number of symptoms (impaired fi ne motor skills and concentration, grogginess, urinary frequency) [85] or even decline in cognitive functioning [86 – 88] . Those requiring insulin may be limited
additionally by highly structured activities of daily living (the
requirement of meticulous glucose monitoring, insulin administration, timed eating), recurrent hospitalizations, hyperglycemic
and hypoglycemic episodes, and by regular preventative or therapeutic medical visits.
 Indeed, the physical manifestations of diabetes become more
signifi cant with the development of complications. As such,
visual impairment, restricted mobility (from shortness of breath,
chest pain or even amputation) and general ill health (ranging
from increased susceptibility to infection all the way to uremia
related to irreversible renal dysfunction) are all considerable
impediments to productive work and engagement in socially
valuable activity. Cross - sectional studies in the USA have demonstrated that elevated glycated haemoglobin (HbA 1c ) is associated with a higher likelihood of missing work, greater hours
absent [89] and reduced at - work effi ciency [85] .
 Depending on the health status of the individual and severity
of disease, disability can be temporary or permanent. There is
limited country - specifi c data on the permanent disability resulting from diabetes, although diabetes is the leading cause of adult -
 onset blindness, non - traumatic amputations and irreversible
kidney failure worldwide [22] . Data from Chile showed that 8%
of people with diabetes had some form of permanent disability
 [74] .
 Less tangible, but no less severe, are the psychosocial burdens
that may accompany diabetes and affect functioning [90,91] . In
a health maintenance organization cohort of 1642 people with 
diabetes, 12% were unemployed, 7% of those employed had
missed more than 5 working days in the previous month and 4%
of employed subjects reported diffi culties with completing work
tasks. Of those with any form of work disability inducing absence
and/or poor productivity, over half had minor and/or major signs
and symptoms of depression [92] .
 The complexity of disability as a limitation of individual and
societal function is in quantifying this shortcoming. There are
several methods that have been used which factor in age, education and occupation, but most have at least some imperfection
because of the necessity of making judgments about the value of
activities. This is especially diffi cult where there are cultural and
ideological dissimilarities between the evaluator and the population being appraised.
Mortality
 Ascertaining the global mortality attributable to diabetes is no
easy task. Most mortality statistics rely on documented causes of
death and do not acknowledge the roles of glucose dysregulation
in underlying mortality associated with CVD and renal diseases.
Danaei et al. [29] have therefore argued that evaluating actual
diabetes - related mortality should take into account that
diabetes contributes to 21% of CHD and 13% of stroke mortality
worldwide. The World Health Organization (WHO) incorporated these sentiments into calculating that diabetes is the fi fth
leading cause of death worldwide in 2000 [93] . The International
Diabetes Federation ’ s most recent Diabetes Atlas approximates
that diabetes is responsible for 6.8% of total global mortality (4
million deaths) annually [22,94] . In addition, the mortality
attributable to diabetes would be even higher if deaths related to
IGT were also included. This diabetes precursor independently
increases the risk of mortality, and has a prevalence of 15 – 40%
in adults [6] .
 Altogether, diabetes is associated with premature mortality,
shortening life expectancy by approximately 7 – 15 years [95,96] .
In developed countries, CVDs account for an overwhelming
65 – 75% of deaths in people with diabetes [97,98] . In low - resource
settings, infections and acute metabolic emergencies are still the
prevailing causes of death in people with diabetes [11,12,65,99] .
ESRD also carries inexorably high mortality, mainly because of
inaccessibility (physical and fi nancial) of treatment (dialysis and/
or transplantation) in most LMICs [11] . As a result, globally,
CVD and nephropathy are the most prominent fatal endpoints,
and occurrence is analogous to duration of disease in that early
life survival and long - standing diabetes increase susceptibility to
succumbing from these illnesses [27] .
 There is regional variation in the global distribution of diabetes - related mortality. Estimates for the percentages of deaths
attributable to diabetes by region are shown in Table 5.1 . Although
the proportion of deaths in LMICs is lower than in more developed countries, the absolute numbers of deaths, by virtue of
larger population size, outnumber those in economically developed countries. South Asia is currently reported to have the
highest absolute number of diabetes - related deaths annually
 [100] . Also, there is a noticeably greater proportion of deaths in
 younger age groups in LMICs, resulting in higher loss of life years,
and affecting the economically active subpopulations in these
countries.
 It must be mentioned that in Africa, the HIV/AIDS epidemic
has already altered patterns of mortality and life expectancy and
is projected to modify these further. Irrespective of the fact that
sub - Saharan Africa accounts for 72% of HIV - related deaths
worldwide [101] , projections based on demographic trends alone
suggest that the prevalence of diabetes will continue to grow in
this region. Widespread use of antiretroviral therapy will also
directly (in the form of pancreatic dysfunction associated with
therapy) and indirectly (increasing longevity of life) affect diabetes prevalence. The scarcity of data emanating from this continent
does not allow a greater comprehension of the relative impacts
of these forces versus contemporary sociodemographic and epidemiologic transitions.
Economic and s ocial i mplications
 The prototypical chronic nature of diabetes requires empowered
self - and clinician - guided management for the duration between
diagnosis and death. Forestalling complications and premature
mortality is the central theme underlying glucose control and
preventative management. Together, the care and serious consequences of diabetes are burdensome and costly. Quantifying the
costs of diabetes from the perspectives of diabetes patients as well
as national resource use and losses are critical towards informing
appropriate health care planning, resource allocation and
response strategies.
 Approaches used to estimate economic costs of disease vary,
not only by the perspective taken, but also by methodology
applied, data sources used, year of estimation, as well as purchasing power and clinical practice patterns in different settings
(Table 5.2 ). Needless to say, between - country comparisons are
even more problematic where issues emerge regarding uncertainty of incidence and prevalence estimates, and standardization
of measures and criteria. General principles and concepts of estimating cost are described [1,67,102,103] .
 Types of c osts
 Direct c osts ( i nputs)
 These include costs of treatment and care of the disease, broadly
encompassing all outpatient consultations, inpatient care, diagnostic investigations, therapeutic procedures, pharmacotherapy,
paramedical care (e.g. home nursing, physiotherapy), patient
time, transportation and rehabilitation.
 Indirect c osts ( l ost o utput)
 These costs represent the present and future value of economic
productivity lost by society on account of temporary or permanent disability, excess morbidity and premature mortality from
disease; they are typically calculated by estimating foregone
income by investigating the cumulative impacts of absenteeism,
employment status and income, for both the individual and
caregiver(s).
 Intangible c osts
 Costs are associated with the psychosocial impacts (e.g. stress,
depression, emotional problems) and altered quality of life from
an illness; they may include diminished family role, informal care
and foregone income by family members; these costs are typically
diffi cult to estimate because of relative lack of standardized
methods.
 Cost a ppraisal m ethods
 Cost - o f - i llness m ethod
 This is the most widely used approach to describe the direct and
 indirect costs of disease to society and is conducted by exploring
costs in a group of selected persons either over a defi ned fi nite
period (e.g. 1 year) or through the natural progression of the
disease.
 Human c apital a pproach
 This is a method of estimating indirect costs of disease, with an
emphasis on foregone earnings and employment; it is criticized
as a tool because of the tendency for overestimating future values,
accepting wage disparities and disregarding socially valuable
activities such as housekeeping and volunteer work.
 Friction c ost a pproach
 This approach is a more conservative measure of indirect costs
that considers lost productivity as fi nite where restoration of productivity (return to work or replacement of worker) occurs
within a timeframe and therefore limits production losses; it does,
however, require detailed data.
 “ Top - d own ” a pproach
 This calculatates costs from national databases and/or estimates,
partitioning costs of different illnesses according to diagnoses; it
requires accurate data entry, especially when indirect costs are
being investigated but avoids the risk of double counting.
 “ Bottom - u p ” a pproach
 This follows the trail of illness - related costs of a defi ned subpopulation with the illness, over a fi nite period.
 Studies that have examined costs of diabetes vary in their estimates of the excess costs generated through resource consumption. The major drivers of direct health care costs include health
service utilization (outpatient or ambulatory care comprising
health practitioner consultations as well as inpatient care); medication usage; diagnostic tests; self glucose monitoring and therapeutic medical devices; and therapeutic procedures. In more
developed settings, auxiliary services such as paramedical care
(dietitians, physiotherapists, occupational therapists and home
nursing) and preventative checks (foot care, urine and eye testing)
may contribute to costs. The relative contributions of these cost
drivers in various regions of the world are shown in Table 5.3 .
Themes that surface from these studies affi rm the high costs of
complications and associated hospitalization in developed countries, but also point to higher relative costs of purchasing medications in LMICs. Indeed, the supplemental costs of drugs for
co - morbid CVD risk management are also pronounced.
 Demographic and clinical characteristics have profound infl uences on costs. In Germany, compared to the diabetes - free population of the same age, younger people with diabetes (under 40
years of age) had greater incremental costs (4.1 times) than the
people in the elderly age group (only 1.5 times higher) [75] . The
types of diabetes have different costs. T1DM accounts for 5.7%
of people with diabetes in the USA; medical costs of US$10.5
billion (bn) and indirect losses amount to US$4.4 bn, totaling
US$14.9 bn. This is comparatively much lower than the
US$159.5 bn that cumulatively account for T2DM care and lost
productivity, but the cost burden per case is greater for T1DM
 [104] . It has been postulated that more consultations and faster
progression to retinopathy and nephropathy are the main drivers
of cost and mortality risk in those with T1DM [27,76] . In T2DM,
coexistence of hypertension and dyslipidemia have relatively
more signifi cant roles in mediating risk, outcomes and associated
costs.
 The presence of diabetes - related complications greatly increases
both the magnitude and duration of resource consumption. In
particular, CVD and nephropathy are associated with the highest
health care costs in most regions of the world. In the USA,
medical costs increase by a factor of 1.5 when early CVD manifestations develop, and escalate to 3.6 times with the occurrence
of a serious CVD event. Similarly, early renal dysfunction is the
basis for 65% more costs, and the onset of ESRD signifi es a 771%
increase in costs [105 – 107] . Brandle et al . estimated that 1 - year
direct costs of suffering and surviving a major vascular event in
the USA totaled US$24 500 for a myocardial infarction, US$26 600
for a stroke and US$37 600 for an amputation [130] . The Diabetes
Health Economics Study Group estimated that complications
contribute up to 60% of all direct costs, and 80 – 90% of indirect
losses from absenteeism and lost productivity [108] . A rudimentary, but possibly practical fi nding by Gilmer et al. [109] reports
that for every 1% (11 mmol/mol) increase in HbA 1c over 7% ( > 53
mmol/mol), there is a corresponding 10% increase in costs.
 National perspectives reveal large differences in the health care
expenditure in developed and developing country settings.
Although the metrics used are different, per capita expenditure
on health in Tanzania (US$4) and South Africa (US$158), as well
as annual direct costs of diabetes from Argentina (US$330),
France (US$675) and Denmark (US$3535) demonstrate sizeable
between - country disparities [110] . Industrialized countries are
also advantaged in the organization of health care infrastructure,
as well as the fi nancing of the system. For example, nationalized
insurance and social security schemes in France and Germany
cover 83.4% and 86% of these populations, respectively, which
ensures high accessibility to care for citizens [75,84] .
 The imbalance between resource expenditure and needs is
further exemplifi ed by estimates that only 20% of global expenditure occurs in the regions where 80% of people with diabetes live
 [111] , demonstrating that Julian Tudor Hart ’ s [112] “ inverse care
law ” is very relevant to global diabetes burden. This states that
 “ the availability of good medical care tends to vary inversely with
the need for it in the population served ” . As a result of inadequate
public spending on health in LMICs (e.g. in India, only 2% of the
government ’ s annual budget is devoted to health care), sizeable
proportions of household income are spent on health care costs.
In Africa, 40% of people are said to earn less than US$1 per day
( ∼ $300 per annum) [11,12] , and in countries such as Sudan,
almost two - thirds of family incomes are required to pay for the
care of one child with diabetes [113] . In Mozambique, less than
one - fi fth of all health facilities have the wherewithal to offer blood
glucose and urinary ketone measurement [49] . The other end of 
the spectrum comprise developed countries such as Germany and
the USA, which spend 31.3 billion and US$116 billion annually
on direct costs of diabetes, respectively. Of the estimated US$2.2
trillion in health care expenditures in the USA in 2007, one out
of every US$7 spent was for diabetes [114] . These expenses are
partially related to differences in pricing and prescription, but are
also linked to the high costs of new diagnostic and therapeutic
options (e.g. while annual cost of treating a patient with maximal
daily doses of metformin is US$46, the equivalent costs of using
thiazolidinediones are US$710 – 980) [115] .
 Additional considerations with regard to national economic
impact concern the distribution of diabetes burden within populations. In low and middle income countries, diabetes and its
complications disproportionately affect the economically productive age range (15 – 69 years), while in mature market economies, the disease affects the older ( ≥ 65 years), disadvantaged and
ethnic minority subpopulations. The implications emanating
from these trends are that economic development in transitioning countries may be subdued because of loss of unrealized productivity, while direct health costs for the aging and uninsured
populations in developed countries will continue to escalate [1] .
 In LMICs, the lowest income groups bear the greatest burdens,
paying a larger proportion of their household incomes towards
diabetes care (34% and 27% for the urban and rural poor, respectively, vs 4.8% and 5.0% for the high income urban and rural
groups in India, respectively) [116] . Year - on - year increases in
this proportion are greater in impoverished groups, and worsen
with duration of diabetes, presence of complications, hospitalization, surgical therapy and glycemic control requiring insulin
 [81,116,117] .
 Furthermore, LMICs contain large and growing populations
of people with pre - diabetes, as well as groups of people unaware
that they have an asymptomatic metabolic disorder. Pre - diabetes
is independently associated with the development of complications and increased specialist consultations, adding up to at least
US$443 in supplementary expenses per person in the USA [118] .
For individuals with undiagnosed diabetes, proxy measures of
health service utilization suggest that annual costs are approximately US$2864, and may escalate depending on the severity of
complications that have developed by the time of recognition and
formal diagnosis [119] .
 Augmented expenditures associated with complications further
perpetuate destitution and socioeconomic disadvantage (i.e.
opportunity costs of health care expenses are often endured by
foregoing children ’ s education). Meanwhile, hardship amplifi es
vulnerability to disease. The Cost of Diabetes in India (CODI)
 [43] and Bangalore Urban District (BUD) [120,121] diabetes
studies showed a later age at diagnosis of diabetes and occurrence
of disabling complications were associated with lack of awareness,
and being unemployed and less educated (e.g. a 7 - year difference
in age of diagnosis was demonstrated between illiterate people
and those with college education). Similar observations substantiate a bidirectional link between poor health and poverty (Figure 
Broadly speaking, diabetes results in roughly 1.5 – 5 times
greater health care expenditure than the general population,
depending on the context and the cost appraisal methodology
employed [75,77,80,84,103,114] . In addition, it is important to
note that the complex overlaps and interconnections between the
underlying pathophysiology of T2DM and associated co - morbidities of the broader metabolic syndrome may alter the scope of
costs. As such, depending on the viewpoint and chosen values,
resource use attributable to diabetes alone may in fact underestimate the broader range of costs associated with diabetes - related
illnesses as a group. Also, undiagnosed diabetes may not be
described as a contributor to morbidity, mortality and resource
use, suggesting that we may be underestimating the true burden
of this disease. This is particularly relevant in regions of the world
where there are few or no representative data regarding disease
prevalence and causes of death. Finally, the value placed on the
opportunity cost of diabetes - related infi rmity has not been widely
quantifi ed or even qualitatively described.
Changing t rends in c osts
 The global burdens associated with diabetes have been growing
rapidly, and are projected to escalate even further in the future.
The hypothesized explanations for this trend of increasing burden
include, and are not limited to, the rising prevalence of diabetes
and pre - diabetes worldwide; aging and longevity accompanied by
costly co - morbidities; lowered diagnostic thresholds; more attentive detection of cases; availability of newer, more costly treat
ment methods on the basis of industry research and development;
and changes in clinical management, especially growth in use
of self glucose monitoring and medical devices, new therapeutic
drugs and increasing demand for paramedical services. While
it is evident that these latter reasons are more relevant in HICs,
the continued epidemiologic transitions will no doubt affect
LMICs too. It is unfortunate that scarcity of resources and
inadequate access in these settings will result in greater disability
and mortality, perpetuating the obstacles to socioeconomic
development.
Gaps and f uture d irections
 Diabetes imposes serious health, social and economic burdens
worldwide. Quantitative calculations suggest that direct and indirect costs of diabetes worldwide cumulatively total US$376 bn in
2010 [111] . Almost half of all global expenditure occurred in the
USA, which is home to only 8% of those affected by diabetes
worldwide. Given the disparities in burdens, access and expenditures described previously, more widespread and reliable data are
a fi rst step towards greater equity [122] . In addition, studies are
needed that include both long - understood and emerging diabetes
complications, such as cognitive function, in the models, to create
better estimates of diabetes - attributable mortality, morbidity and
cost. Assessing burdens using reliable consistent methods will aid
our comprehension of the complex mix of programmed, predisposing and modifi able factors associated with diabetes, and lays
a foundation for policy development and advocacy for greater
global consciousness.
 Despite varied estimates of expenditure, the pattern is consistent: people with diabetes experience greater symptoms, morbidity, co - morbidities and mortality than those without diabetes;
they have diminished functional capacity and psychosocial illness;
and incur greater costs for health care, self - care and losses in
earning potential and societal role. While reductions in quality of
life are less numerically evident, they are no less distressing.
Needless to say, intervening before diabetes onset may hold great
benefi t in reducing global burdens; however, although there is
evidence from large trials demonstrating that prevention can
forestall conversion from pre - diabetes to diabetes, widespread
translation of these fi ndings is hampered by multiple levels of
barriers (political, social, cultural, behavioral and economic
factors).
 In the future, preparation for the increasing diabetes burden
requires progress in wider collection of reliable data (especially
assuaging the scarcity from low and middle income countries
regarding diabetes - related mortality, complications, disability
and costs), and a greater emphasis on cost - effectiveness studies
which may inform better resource allocation. On the shoulders
of compelling evidence, greater investment and political will are
required to overcome low accessibility and awareness, as well as
to translate the evidence into practical real - life implementation
of proven and effective prevention strategies [123] . 

Introduction
 The German anatomy student Paul Langerhans fi rst described in
1869 the “ islands of clear cells ” distributed throughout the pancreas [1] but he did not realize the physiologic signifi cance of
these cell clusters, which are today known as islets of Langerhans.
We now know that islets are the endocrine compartment of the
pancreas, comprising around 2 – 3% of the total pancreatic
volume. Islets are approximately spherical (Figure 6.1 a), with an
average diameter of 100 – 200 μ m, and a healthy human pancreas
may contain up to a million individual islets, each having its own
complex anatomy, blood supply and innervation.
Islet s tructure and f unction
Islet a natomy
 A typical mammalian islet comprises several thousand endocrine
cells including the insulin - expressing β - cells ( ∼ 60% of adult
human islet cells), glucagon - expressing α - cells (20 – 30%),
somatostatin - expressing δ - cells ( ∼ 10%), pancreatic polypeptide -
 expressing cells ( < 5%), and ghrelin - expressing cells ( ∼ 1%). The
anatomic arrangement of islet cells varies between species. In
rodents, the majority β - cell population forms a central core surrounded by a mantle of α - cells and δ - cells (Figure 6.1 a), but
human islets show less well - defi ned organization with α - cells and
δ - cells also being located throughout the islet (Figure 6.1 b) [2] .
 Islets are highly vascularized, and receive up to 15% of the
pancreatic blood supply despite accounting for only 2 – 3% of the
total pancreatic mass. Each islet is served by an arteriolar blood
supply that penetrates the mantle to form a capillary bed in the
islet core. Earlier studies using vascular casts of rodent islets suggested that the major route of blood fl ow through an islet was
from the inner β - cells to the outer α and δ - cells [3] , but more
recent studies using optical imaging of fl uorescent markers to
follow islet blood fl ow in vivo [4] reveal more complex patterns
of both inner - to - outer and top - to - bottom blood fl ow through
the rodent islet.
 Islets are well supplied by autonomic nerve fi bers and terminals containing the classic neurotransmitters acetylcholine and
norepinephrine, along with a variety of biologically active neuropeptides [5] . Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating polypeptide (PACAP) are
localized with acetylcholine to parasympathetic nerves, where
they may be involved in mediating prandial insulin secretion and
the α - cell response to hypoglycemia [6] . Other neuropeptides,
such as galanin and neuropeptide Y (NPY), are found with norepinephrine in sympathetic nerves where they may have a role in
the sympathetic inhibition of insulin secretion, although there are
marked inter - species differences in the expression of these neuropeptides [5] .
Intra - i slet i nteractions
 The anatomic organization of the islet has a profound infl uence
on the ability of the β - cells to recognize and respond to physioTextbook of Diabetes, 4th edition. Edited by R. Holt, C. Cockram,
A. Flyvbjerg and B. Goldstein. © 2010 Blackwell Publishing.